Head wind for Japanese change
By Hisane Masaki

TOKYO - While Japanese Prime Minister Shinzo Abe's ruling coalition may seem to be cruising easily toward the first revision of the country's postwar pacifist constitution, it has encountered an unexpected head wind - a decline in public support for the move.

In a historic step toward revising the supreme law, Japan's Diet (Parliament) will almost certainly enact a bill soon setting the rules for a national referendum required for any constitutional



changes. It will do this on the strength of the Liberal Democratic Party (LDP)-led coalition's majority in both houses of the Diet.

But recent opinion polls show that public support for constitutional amendments, especially rewriting a clause that has put strict restrictions on Japanese military activities since the end of World War II, has plummeted.

According to a survey of 3,000 Japanese nationwide conducted by the conservative Yomiuri Shimbun, Japan's largest national daily, 46% of those polled favor constitutional revisions, while 39% oppose them, with the rest undecided or having no opinion.

Although those who favor constitutional revisions have consistently outnumbered those who oppose them for 15 years, the percentage of the former has dropped for three years running. The 46% support ratio represents a drop of nine percentage points from a similar poll taken a year ago before Abe took office. Meanwhile, the 39% disapproval ratio was seven percentage points higher from a year ago.

Another recent opinion poll, conducted by Kyodo news agency, also showed a decline in public support for constitutional revisions. The survey showed that the percentage of those who favor revising the constitution dropped to 57% from 61% in a similar survey two years ago. Meanwhile, the percentage of those who oppose revising the constitution increased to 34.5% from 29.8% during the same period. As for war-renouncing Article 9 as a whole, 44.5% of the pollees replied that they saw no need to revise the article while only 25% replied that it should be revised.

It is believed that some of those who used to favor revising the constitution have become cautious about the issue after realizing that what they thought was just an armchair exercise may become a reality. This swing of the public opinion pendulum makes it even more uncertain whether - and when - the constitution will actually be revised.

Since taking office last September, Abe has advocated a more assertive foreign policy and a stronger security alliance with the United States. He has also called for a "departure from the postwar regime" and has made it his top policy goal to seek revisions of the constitution to allow the nation to play a greater role in the international security arena, especially in step with the US. Abe has specifically expressed a strong desire to see the constitution revised within five years.

To be sure, the soon-to-be-enacted national referendum law marks a significant and necessary step toward revising the constitution. Sixty years after the constitution took effect in 1947, Japan still does not have a law concerning a national referendum on constitutional amendments because of opposition to revising the constitution. But public opinion has become more favorable for constitutional amendments in recent years.

Any constitutional revisions, however, are still at least three to four years away because the proposed referendum law actually comes into force three years after its enactment. In addition, there are two high hurdles to be cleared before the constitution can be changed - two-thirds approval of both houses of the Diet then passage of a national referendum with the support from more than half of eligible voters.

Proposed referendum law
The House of Representatives passed an enabling bill on April 13 on holding a national referendum required to revise the constitution. The bill, drafted by Abe's LDP-led coalition, will very likely clear the House of Councilors, as well and become law during the current Diet session. The ruling coalition wants the legislation passed before the 60th anniversary on May 3 of the constitution's coming into force, if possible.

The LDP and New Komeito coalition and the opposition Democratic Party of Japan (DPJ) introduced their own national referendum bills in May, 2006, and attempted in vain to reconcile them. DPJ leader Ichiro Ozawa instructed his party negotiators not to budge even an inch. Consequently, his ruling coalition gave up on negotiations and railroaded its referendum bill through the Lower House on April 13. The DPJ submitted its own referendum bill, but it was rejected.

Ozawa, himself a long-time staunch advocate of constitutional reform and a former LDP bigwig, has hardened his stance on the referendum bill issue since ultra-conservative Abe declared in his New Year's press conference in early January that he will make revising the constitution a key issue in the upper house election in July.

Although many members of his own party favor enacting a national referendum bill - and even revising the constitution - Ozawa feared that cooperating for the passage of the bill would only benefit the coalition ahead of the crucial election.

In addition, the DPJ leader did not want to undermine a united front among the opposition parties against the ruling coalition in the run-up to the poll. The other, smaller opposition forces, including the Socialist and Communist parties, are vehemently opposed to any constitutional revisions. They urged the DPJ to oppose any referendum bill.

The coalition's referendum bill introduced a controversial element into Japan's elections by apparently lowering the voting age for referendum from 20 to18. If the bill passes the Diet, those who have reached the age of 18, instead of 20 at present, will officially be deemed adults - a change that could significantly alter Japanese society.

An attached provision of the ruling coalition's bill, which is now being deliberated in the Upper House, stipulates the need to review many laws, including the Public Offices Election Law and the Civil Code before the national referendum law comes into effect in three years' time. The election law sets the voting age at 20 and the Civil Code defines the age of adulthood as 20 and older.

There are said to be well over 20 other related laws that may need to be reviewed, including the Juvenile Law and the Road Traffic Law. But coalition officials say that at least the laws banning smoking tobacco and drinking alcohol among those aged 19 and younger will not need to be revised.

Furthermore, the DPJ, which strongly called for lowering the voting age to 18 in negotiations with the ruling coalition, would unlikely go along with any bill that didn't lower the voting age. Yukio Edano, a top DPJ negotiator on the constitution-related issues, said that the party will not accept a national referendum with the age limit unchanged at 20.

If the referendum bill is enacted in the current Diet session, as widely expected, the focus of attention will shift to debates by panels to be set up to screen constitutional amendment bills. The standing panels are to be established in both houses of the Diet under the referendum law. The new panels will likely be established during an extraordinary Diet session scheduled to convene following the Upper House poll in July.

Of course passing constitutional amendments will be difficult. The coalition of the LDP and New Komeito, a centrist party backed by the lay Buddhist organization Soka Gakkai, is far short of a two-thirds majority in the Upper House. This situation will not change regardless of the outcome of that chamber's election this summer. Therefore, the ruling coalition will very likely need help from members of the opposition parties to obtain the required two-thirds of all votes in both houses of the Diet.

Declining public support
In the autumn of 2005, Abe's LDP adopted its draft of a new constitution that would clear the way for Japan to play a greater role in international security. The current war-renouncing, pacifist constitution, drafted by the US occupation forces immediately after Japan's defeat in World War II, has never been altered.

The LDP draft calls for, among other things, rewriting Article 9 - the clause almost synonymous with Japan's post-war defense policy - to acknowledge clearly the existence of a "military for self-defense". The draft also calls for more active participation in international peace cooperation activities. All these elements are missing from the current constitution.

Article 9, Section 1 says, "Aspiring sincerely to an international peace based on justice and order, the Japanese people forever renounce war as a sovereign right of the nation and the threat or use of force as means of settling international disputes." Article 9, Section 2 says, "In order to accomplish the aim of the preceding paragraph, land, sea, and air forces, as well as other war potential, will never be maintained. The right of belligerency of the state will not be recognized."

The current constitution is widely interpreted as forbidding the possession of a military. Although, in reality, Japan has about 240,000 troops of the Self-Defense Forces (SDF) and one of the world's biggest defense expenditures, successive governments have explained away the contradiction by claiming that SDF is not a military.

Many Japanese feel more insecure in the increasingly volatile security environment surrounding their country. There is growing alarm in Japan over what are perceived as real or potential threats posed by neighbors North Korea and China. At the same time Japan is under increasing pressure from its most important ally, the US, to shoulder more of the burden of its foreign and security policy, regionally and globally.

Having a "self-imposed" new constitution to replace the current one, drafted by the US occupation forces soon after Japan's defeat in World War II, is not merely a matter of national pride, but something Japanese leaders firmly believe the nation must do to cope with those new challenges.

Momentum for revising the constitution, which took effect in 1947, has mounted following the September 2005 general election, in which the LDP-led coalition under then prime minister Junichiro Koizumi won a landslide victory, garnering more than a two-thirds majority in the 480-seat House of Representatives, the more powerful of the two Diet chambers. The political momentum has gained further steam with the inauguration of Abe, who has become the first premier to vow to put revising the constitution on his political agenda.

Of those who favor revising the constitution, the largest percentage - 48% - tend to believe that new problems have arisen, such as the nation's inability to make proper international contributions, under the current constitution. Of those who oppose revising the constitution, the largest percentage - 47% - replied that the nation's top law is a pacifist constitution that Japan can be proud of. 